---
aliases:
  - justice
tags:
  - Cardinal-virtue
---
Justice (v): “the moral virtue that consists in the constant and firm will to give their due to God and neighbour” (Catechism of the Catholic Church, n. 1807 in (_Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance_, p. 25).  

**Rationale: ordered toward others, according to the rationale of paying dues in full:** “justice is ordered toward others, all virtues that are ordered toward others can by reason of this similarity be annexed to justice. But as is likewise clear from what was said above (q. 58, a. 11), the nature of justice consists in repaying to the other what is owed to him up to equality or in full (*quod ei debetur secundum aequalitatem*).” (Part 2-2, q80, a1, resp)
$\qquad$Two ways, therefore, that a disposition can fall short of justice: not paying dues in full, or isn’t something owed to another.

(a) Christian justice is supernaturalised pagan justice, enlivened by a new perspective on the dignify and sacredness of persons. this is because Christian justice has a distinctive form \[that is, matter], namely a principal concern with the dignity of persons: “The fact that any human being in this life is actually, or at least potentially, an adopted child of God imparts a distinctive form to Christian justice. After all, a child of God shares in the dignity and sacredness of God.” We are “persons with inherent dignity, called to know and love God. Indeed, even the very notion of a ‘person’, as we now understand the word, emerged from debates in early Christianity about the nature of Jesus Christ and the Trinity” (_Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance_, p. 26).  

(b) “Justice in the Christian sense, however, is inseparable from our calling to be children of God, loving with God the things that God loves” (_Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance_, p. 29).

## Network
The gift of [[Piety (g) (b)|piety]]  is ”Appended to the virtue of justice” (_Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Spirit_, screen 6).  

“The fruits of the Holy Spirit generated by justice and [[Piety (g) (b)|piety]] are [[Goodness (f)|goodness]], [[Benignity (f)|benignity]] and [[Meekness (vm) (b) (f)|meekness]] (Ga 5:22-23)” (_Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance_, p. 26).  

### Degenerates
There are two *integral* parts of justice, namely doing good and turning away from evil.

### Doing good
*Potential parts of justice that “repay to someone else what is owed to him, but that cannot repay it up to equality or in full.” (Part 2-2, q80, a1, resp)*
1. [[Religion (vm)]] – what is owed to God, but our repayment cannot be equal to what is owed to God. (Part 2-2, q80, a1, resp)
2. [[Piety (vm)]] – “what is owed to parents \[, but] cannot be repaid up to equality or in full for what is owed to them.” (Part 2-2, q80, a1, resp)
	$\qquad$ 18. [Sanctity (vm)](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FDegenerates%20of%20Justice%2FSanctity%20(vm))
1. [[Respectfulness (vm)]] – what is owed to a person “outstanding in some form of worthiness and deemed deserving of reverence and honor” to whom one “cannot repay the value of virtue up to equality or in full.” (Part 2-2, q80, a1, resp)
	$\qquad$ 19. [Obedience (vm)](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FDegenerates%20of%20Justice%2FObedience%20(vm))

*A class of virtues involving a moral due to other persons* (*Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance*, p.28)
$\qquad$*Potential parts of justice that falls “short of being something that is owed in justice can be thought of in terms of the two sorts of debt, viz., moral debt and legal debt” (Part 2-2, q80, a1, resp)*
	$\qquad$ *Legal debt*
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 4. [[Epieikeia (vm)]] – good judgment in exceptional cases
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 5. [Fairness (vm)](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FDegenerates%20of%20Justice%2FFairness%20(vd))
	$\qquad$ *Moral debt*
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ *without which moral uprightness cannot be preserved*
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ *on the side of the one who is in debt*
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 6. [[Truthfulness (vm)]] (*veritas*) – “what has been or will be is told unchanged”
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 7. [Faithfulness (vd)] – through which pronouncements are made
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ *on the side of the one to whom the debt is owed*
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ *when what is done is good*
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 8. [[Gratitude (vm)]] (*gratia*) – desiring “to repay another, remembering instances of \[their] friendship and service”
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ *when what is done is bad*
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 9. [[Revenge (vm)]] (*vindicatio*) – the defending or avenging oneself of violence, injury, or anything derogatory
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ *contributing to a greater degree of moral uprightness*
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ *Among equals or toward subordinates*
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 10. [[Friendliness (vm)]] (*amicitia*) “in exterior interactions and interior concord” (Part 2-2, q80, a1, repl obj 2)
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 11. [Benevolence (vm)](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FDegenerates%20of%20Justice%2FAffection%20(vm)) here called affection
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 12. [Concord (vm)](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FDegenerates%20of%20Justice%2FConcord%20(vd))
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 13. [Beneficence](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FDegenerates%20of%20Justice%2FBeing%20humane%20(vm)) here called being humane
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 14. [Discipline (vm)](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FDegenerates%20of%20Justice%2FDiscipline%20(vm))	
	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 	$\qquad$ 15. [[Liberality (vm)]] or Generosity (*liberalitas*)

	

_A class of virtues pertaining to genuine justice (contrasted in ST with particular justice)_
Potential parts:
$\qquad$ 16. [[Good exchange (vm)]]
$\qquad$ 17. [[Good lawmaking (vm)]]

### Turning away from evil
Potential parts:
$\qquad$ 20. [[Innocence (vm)]]