---
aliases:
  - meekness
  - mildness
  - Mansuetudo
  - gentleness
  - clemency
  - second beatitude
tags:
  - Fruit
  - Beatitude
  - Temperance-degenerate
---
## As a virtue
Meekness (*Mansuetudo*) (vm): the disposition that keeps under control “the movement of anger tending toward vindication.”

Gentleness mitigates anger: “Now [clemency](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FDegenerates%20of%20Temperance%2FClemency%20(vm)) and gentleness likewise consist in a certain sort of restraint, since, as is clear from what has been said (aa. 1-2), clemency limits punishments, whereas gentleness mitigates anger. And this is why both clemency and gentleness are adjoined to [temperance](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FTemperance%20(v)) as to a principal virtue. And accordingly they are posited as parts of temperance.” (Part 2-2, Q 157, a3, response)
$\qquad$”they differ from one another, in that clemency moderates the exterior act of punishing, whereas gentleness properly diminishes the passion of anger.” (Part 2-2, q157, a1, resp)

## As a beatitude
Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.
The second beatitude.

## As a fruit
Meekness/mildness (*Mansuetudo*) (f): to “bear with equanimity the evils inflicted on us by our neighbours.” (Part 1-2, q70, a3, resp)
$\qquad$“The fruits of the Holy Spirit generated by justice and piety are goodness, benignity and mildness (Ga 5:22-23)” (*Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance*, p. 26).

**Reason for including meekness (f) in this node:**
“**Objection 3:** Further, meekness or mildness is included ([Mat. 5:4](https://www.ccel.org/study/Matt_5:4-5:4)) among the beatitudes, and ([Gal. 5:23](https://www.ccel.org/study/Gal_5:23-5:23)) among the fruits. Now the virtues differ from the beatitudes and fruits. Therefore they are not comprised under virtue.” (Part 2-2, a2, obj3)
$\qquad$”**Reply to Objection 3:** The beatitudes are acts of virtue: while the fruits are delights in virtuous acts. Wherefore nothing hinders meekness being reckoned both virtue, and beatitude and fruit.” (Part 2-2, a2, rep3)

A fruit pertaining to one’s neighbour.

## Network
The virtue of meekness is a potential part of [temperance](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FTemperance%20(vm)).

### Connection of the gifts to the beatitudes
/
	1. Generic: 
		(a) The beatitudes are connected to [hope], since they are “micro-narratives” which link an undesirable state with a promised future state (*Faith, Hope and Love*, p. 50). 
		/
		(b) The beatitudes exhibit a shift from (i) more passive states, such as mourning and meekness, to more active states like exercising mercy and making peace; (ii) a shift from first-personal need (e.g. “poor in spirit”) to a focus on other persons and a “care and outpouring of love for other persons”. “The Christian life \[…] gradually becomes more ecstatic and outward-focused, as the exercise of the virtue of hope gradually enables and gives way to the practice of [divine love]” (*Faith, Hope and Love*, p. 51). 
		$\qquad$Thus **I infer** that the second beatitude connects narratively to the [third beatitude, righteousness](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FGifts%2FCourage%20(g)%20Righteousness%20(b)).
			/
	2. Specific
		(c) beatitudes are enumerated by (a) reference to the concupiscible and irascible parts of the soul and (b) their relation to the “three kinds of beatitude” which “various authors have posited” (Part 1-2, q69, a3, resp). The first “kind” is a false kind of beatitude and is to be resisted, the second kind is to be strengthened, and the third shares in the essence of true beatitude and is thus a reward for the perfect of the second kind. Concerning the first kind, Aquinas relies in part on the gospel of Luke, which only gives four beatitudes, to account for the various kind of resistance to the pleasurable life:
>		*Luke reports that our Lord’s sermon was delivered to the crowds. Hence, he numbers the beatitudes in keeping with the capacity of the crowds, which knew only pleasurable and temporal and earthly beatitude. Hence, by the four beatitudes our Lord rules out the four things that seem to pertain to this sort of beatitude. The first is an abundance of exterior things, which he rules out by saying, “Blessed are the poor.” The second is a man’s being well off with respect to his body, in food and drink and other such things; and he rules this out in the second beatitude by saying, “Blessed are those who hunger.” The third is a man’s being well off with respect to hearty enjoyment (*cordis iucunditas*), *and he rules this out with the third beatitude by saying, “Blessed are they who are now mourning.” The fourth is external favor in the eyes of men, and he rules this out with the fourth beatitude by saying, “Blessed will you be when men hate you.”*

/
		The first, second, and third beatitudes “remove the obstacle posed by \[the first kind of beatitude, a false kind of beatitude,] the *pleasurable life*” (Part 1-2, q69, a3, resp). “Blessed are the poor in spirit…” is thus read as a blessed deprivation of pleasure, referring either “to the contempt for riches or to the contempt for honours that results from humility” (Part 1-2, q69, a3, resp). 
		$\qquad$“Blessed are those who mourn…” is read as not merely using concupiscible passions with moderation, as virtue directs, but if necessary, “wholly casting them aside… or even taking on a willful sorrow” (Part 1-2, q69, a3, resp). The stance is one of almost flamboyant disregard due to a profound detachment, presumably due to a far greater and more beautiful love for (and from) God.
		$\qquad$ “Blessed are the meek…” is read as being “wholly undisturbed” by irascible passions as a result of the action of a gift (Part 1-2, q69, a3, resp). The stance is one of complete insulation from the striving of irascible passions, due to the gift of piety by which “we are moved to regard other persons as God regards them, namely as potential or actual children [of God], and thereby our brothers and sisters” (_Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Spirit_, screen 8).
		$\qquad$The fourth and fifth beatitudes strengthen us in the second kind of beatitude, the active life, which to Aquinas “consists principally in what we render to our neighbours, either as a debt or a spontaneous gift” (Part 1-2, q69, a3, resp). “Blessed are those who hunger and thirst or justice…” thus surpasses the virtue of justice’s reasonable desire with a “fervent desire that we fulfil the works of justice” (Part 1-2, q69, a3, resp). 
		$\qquad$”Blessed are the merciful…” is read as pertaining to the “spontaneous gift” clause above, and it surpasses the reasonable giving of gifts to “friends or others who are joined to us” in accordance with [liberality](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FDegenerates%20of%20Justice%2FLiberality%20(vm)), by extending generosity further afield as per Luke 14:12-13: “When you fix a dinner or a supper, do not invite your friends or rothers… but invite the poor and the maimed.” This, Aquinas claims, is “properly speaking, to show mercy” (Part 1-2, q69, a3, resp). Interestingly, the gift-driven generosity \[is it really mercy?] does *not* include friends or brothers, it leaves these to reason “out of reverence for God” (Part 1-2, q69, a3, resp).
		$\qquad$The sixth and seventh beatitudes are *rewards*, that is, at least the beginning of a partaking in final beatitude, since the third kind of beatitude, the contemplative life, is thought to share in its essence (Part 1-2, q69, a3, resp). Thus, the gift of understanding is how we grasp what is proposed to us by God, and “blessed are the pure of heart…” has *seeing God* as a reward for the cleansing of the heart through the second kind of beatitude.
		$\qquad$The gift of wisdom is right judgment on account of “connaturality” with supernatural things, due to “adoptive filiation” (Part 1-2, q69, a3, resp). This, ”blessed are the peacemakers…” has *being a son of God* as an effect of the active life “by which a man is perfected in relation to his neighbour” (Part 1-2, q69, a3, repl obj 1). Aquinas cites Isaiah 32:17 – “the work of justice is peace” to establish this relation. So… *the gift of becoming a son of God is the reward for bringing one’s relations to neighbours to a state of peace.*
			/
	3. As for **how the promissory rewards within each beatitude are connected**, Aquinas, in responding to an objection that the rewards seem to be back-to-front, writes the following:
	
> 		*The rewards are likewise ordered to one another by addition. For it is more to possess the land (*terra*) *of the kingdom of heaven than simply to have the kingdom of heaven, since we have many things which we do not possess peacefully and with security. It is also more to be consoled in the kingdom than to have and possess the kingdom, since we possess many things with sorrow. Likewise, it is more to have one’s fill than simply to be consoled, since having one’s fill implies an abundance of consolation. Yet mercy exceeds having one’s fill, in the sense that a man receives more than he has merited or could desire. And it is still greater to see God, just as it is greater for someone not only to dine in the king’s court but also to see the king’s face. Moreover, the king’s son has the highest place in the royal household.* (Part 1-2, q69, a4, repl obj 3)
		

### All beatitudes are (perfect) fruits
Also: “all the beatitudes can be called fruits, but not *vice versa*.” Moreover, beatitudes are perfect fruits! -which, “by reason of their perfection, are attributed more to the gifts than to the virtues.” (Part 1-2, q70, a2 resp)

// makes me wonder whether *expression* of bodily desires, not just the exercise of *restraint*, also has its own set of fruits! 

### Connection to Fruits
“The fruits of the Holy Spirit generated by [justice](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FJustice%20(v)) and [piety](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FGifts%2FPiety%20(g)) are goodness, benignity and mildness (Ga 5:22-23)” (_Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance_, p. 26).  

[[Benignity (f)]] is ”The principal fruit of the Holy Spirit that culminates \[the] transformation \[of the third beatitude” (*Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance*, p. 34).