---
aliases:
  - benignity
  - kindness
tags:
  - Fruit
---
Benignity (*Benignitas*) (f): kindness fired up to fervency by love.
$\qquad$“like a holy fire, as if a soul melts to relieve the needs of others (*ST* I-II, q.70, a.3) 
$\qquad$\[…an experience of melting into] an interpersonal union with the heard of Jesus Christ” (*Faith, Hope and Love*, p. 36). 
$\qquad$“The fruits of the Holy Spirit generated by justice and piety are goodness, benignity and mildness (Ga 5:22-23)” (*Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance*, p. 26).
$\qquad$”The principal fruit of the Holy Spirit that culminates \[the] transformation \[of the third beatitude]” (*Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance*, p. 34).
$\qquad$”Aquinas describes benignity as a melting or liquefying of the soul to relieve the needs of others (ST 1a2ae, q. 70, a. 3). This language suggests that the ulimate fruit of the Christian life of justice is that the soul resonates in perfect harmony with God, catching fire with the Holy Spirit, the love of God” (*Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance*, p. 34).

A fruit pertaining to one’s neighbour.
## Network
“The fruits of the Holy Spirit generated by [justice](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FJustice%20(v)) and [piety](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FGifts%2FPiety%20(g)) are goodness, benignity and mildness (Ga 5:22-23)” (_Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance_, p. 26).  

$\qquad$”The principal fruit of the Holy Spirit that culminates \[the] transformation \[of the [third beatitude, mourning](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FGifts%2FKnowledge%20(g)%20(vi)%20Mourning%20(b))]” (*Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance*, p. 34).

”Kindness (*benignitas*) seems to be the same as [affection](obsidian://open?vault=Obsidian&file=VGBF%20Network%2FCardinal%20Virtues%2FDegenerates%20of%20Justice%2FAffection%20(vm)) (*affectus*), which Macrobius posits. Hence, in *Etymologia* Isidore says, “Kindness is a man prepared to do good on the spur of the moment and a man gentle in speech.” And Andronicus himself says that kindness is “the habit of doing good spontaneously.”